Add Gateway API documentation (#43621)
kubernetes/website: content/en/docs/concepts/services-networking/gateway.md

Reviewer: Please use Markdown links in `[]()` style; these are easier for docs contributors to work with (especially when resolving merge conflicts).

---

> title: Gateway

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Gateway APIs
```
We could also call it “Gateway API”, which was the name for beta. It's tricky; neither is right.

- this is a family of APIs
- people have been calling that family of APIs “Gateway API” for a while, including since beta
- there's no style guide (that I know of) for the docs for extensions like Gateway API or Cluster API.

Author: Yes, naming for this project has been tricky. It started off plural with the name "Service APIs" but was changed to the current singular form, being named after the primary API kind. I dropped API from the title for consistency with the Ingress title but I'll add it as you suggest.

* __Role-oriented:__ Gateway API kinds are modeled after organizational roles that are
  responsible for managing Kubernetes service networking:
  * __Infrastructure Provider:__ Manages infrastructure that allows multiple isolated clusters
    to serve multiple tenants, e.g. a cloud provider.
  * __Cluster Operator:__ Manages clusters and is typically concerned with policies, network
    access, application permissions, etc.
  * __Application Developer:__ Manages an application running in a cluster and is typically
    concerned with application-level configuration and [Service][service] composition.
* __Portable:__ Gateway API specifications are defined as [custom resources][crds] and are supported
  by many [implementations][implementations].
* __Expressive:__ Gateway API kinds support functionality for common traffic routing use cases
  such as header-based matching, traffic weighting, and others that were only possible in [Ingress][ingress]
  by using custom annotations.
* __Extensible:__ Gateway allows for custom resources to be linked at various layers of the API.
  This makes granular customization possible at the appropriate places within the API structure.

> Refer to the full Gateway API [documentation][gw-api] for additional details of these principles.

Reviewer: I'd list that much later in the page, maybe just before the What's next heading.

## Resource model

The Gateway API has three stable API kinds:

* __GatewayClass:__ Defines a set of gateways with common configuration and managed by a controller
  that implements the class.

* __Gateway:__ Defines an instance of traffic handling infrastructure, such as cloud load balancer.

* Route kinds: The Gateway API defines API kinds, HTTPRoute for example, that define protocol-specific
  rules for mapping traffic from a Gateway listener to a representation of backend network endpoints.
  These endpoints are often represented as a {{<glossary_tooltip text="Service" term_id="service">}}.

The Gateway API is organized into different API kinds that have interdependent relationships to support
the role-oriented nature of organizations. A Gateway object is associated with exactly one GatewayClass;
the GatewayClass describes the gateway controller responsible for managing Gateways of this class.
Route kinds such as HTTPRoute, are then associated to Gateways. A Gateway can filter the routes that
may be attached to its `listeners`, forming a bidirection trust model with routes.

The following figure illustrates the relationships of the three primary Gateway API resources:

> {{< figure src="/docs/images/gateway-kind-relationships.svg" alt="gateway-kind-relationships" class="diagram-medium" link="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kubernetes/website/main/content/en/docs/images/gateway-kind-relationships.svg" >}}

Reviewer: - Don't link to raw GitHub content like this; people might bookmark it and we don't want that.
- Please set alt attributes that are meaningful for people with accessibility needs

### GatewayClass {#api-kind-gateway-class}

{{< gateway-feature-state for_gateway_version="v1.0" state="stable" >}}

Gateways can be implemented by different controllers, often with different configurations. A Gateway
must reference a GatewayClass that contains the name of the controller which implements the
class. The GatewayClass can also define optional configuration parameters.

A minimal GatewayClass example:

> {{% code_sample file="service/networking/gateway-class.yaml" %}}

Reviewer: Something to watch out for: we test that our examples work (manually), and right now we try them with vanilla Kubernetes.

We'll have to work out how to support manifest examples where you need to install an extension, even an in-project extension, before they work.

It might be easier to use a YAML snippet and put a comment in the source to explain why. Then track an issue, post-merge, to track adding the support so we can use and test examples.
In parallel, we're looking to move that testing forward so that PRs fail CI unless the example is a valid manifest.

Author: I moved the examples to inline yaml snippets.

See the [Gateway][gateway] reference for a full definition of this API kind.

### HTTPRoute {#api-kind-httproute}

{{< gateway-feature-state for_gateway_version="v1.0" state="stable" >}}

The HTTPRoute kind specifies routing behavior of HTTP requests from a Gateway listener to backend network
endpoints. For a Service backend, an implementation may represent the backend network endpoint as a Service
IP or the backing Endpoints of the Service. An HTTPRoute represents configuration that is applied to the
underlying Gateway implementation. For example, defining a new HTTPRoute may result in configuring additional
traffic routes into a cloud load balancer or in-cluster proxy server.

A minimal HTTPRoute example:

{{% code_sample file="service/networking/httproute.yaml" %}}

In this example, HTTP traffic from Gateway `example-gateway` with the Host: header set to `www.example.com`
and the request path specified as `/login` will be routed to Service `example-svc` on port `8080`.

See the [HTTPRoute][httproute] reference for a full definition of this API kind.

## Request flow

Here is a simple example of HTTP traffic being routed to a Service by using a Gateway and an HTTPRoute:

> {{< figure src="/docs/images/gateway-request-flow.svg" alt="gateway-request-flow" class="diagram-medium" link="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kubernetes/website/main/content/en/docs/images/gateway-request-flow.svg" >}}

Reviewer: - Don't link to raw GitHub content like this; people might bookmark it and we don't want that.
- Please set alt attributes that are meaningful for people with accessibility needs

In this example, the request flow for a Gateway implemented as a reverse proxy is:

1. The client starts to prepare an HTTP request for the URL `http://www.example.com`
2. The client's DNS resolver queries for the destination name and learns a mapping to
   one or more IP addresses associated with the Gateway.
3. The client sends a request to the Gateway IP address; the reverse proxy receives the HTTP
   request and uses the Host: header to match a configuration that was derived from the Gateway
   and associated HTTPRoute.
4. Optionally, the reverse proxy can perform request header and/or path matching based
   on match rules of the HTTPRoute.
5. Optionally, the reverse proxy can modify the request; for example, to add or emove headers,
   based on filter rules of the HTTPRoute.
6. Lastly, the reverse proxy forwards the request to one or more backends.

## Conformance

Gateway API covers a broad set of features and is widely implemented. This combination requires
clear conformance definitions and tests to ensure that the API provides a consistent experience
wherever it is used.

See the [conformance][conformance] documentation to understand details such as release channels,

> conformance testing, and feature support levels.

Reviewer: I'd omit this. If it's important, link from the What's next section to a page about conformance testing for Gateway API.

> ## What's next

Reviewer: Please use the appropriate shortcode here.
```suggestion
## {{% heading "whatsnext" %}}
```

Instead of Gateway API resources being natively implemented by Kubernetes, the specifications
are defined as [Custom Resources][crds] supported by a wide range of [implementations][implementations].
[Install][install] the Gateway API CRDs or follow the installation instructions of your your selected
implementation. After installing an implementation, use the [Getting Started][guides] guide to help you
quickly start working with Gateway API.

{{< note >}}
Make sure to review the documentation of your selected implementation to understand any caveats.
{{< /note >}}

> ### Migrating from Ingress

Reviewer: This would be better to cover outside of the What's next section.

Gateway is the successor to the [Ingress][ingress] API. However, it does not include the Ingress
resource. As a result, a one-time conversion from your existing Ingress resources to the relevant
Gateway API resources is necessary.

Refer to the [ingress migration][ing-migrate] guide for details on migrating Ingress resources to
Gateway API resources.

[conformance]: https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/concepts/conformance/
[crds]: docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/custom-resources
[gatewayclass]: https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1.GatewayClass
[gateway]: https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1.Gateway
[gw-api]: https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/
[guides]: https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/
[httproute]: https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1.HTTPRoute
[ingress]: /docs/concepts/services-networking/ingress/

> [ing-migrate]: https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/migrating-from-ingress/?h=ingress#migrating-from-ingress

Reviewer: Does this also work?
```suggestion
[ing-migrate]: https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/migrating-from-ingress/#migrating-from-ingress
```

    concerned with application-level configuration and [Service](/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/)
    composition.
* __Portable:__ Gateway API specifications are defined as [custom resources](docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/custom-resources)
  and are supported by many [implementations](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/implementations/).
* __Expressive:__ Gateway API kinds support functionality for common traffic routing use cases
  such as header-based matching, traffic weighting, and others that were only possible in
  [Ingress](/docs/concepts/services-networking/ingress/) by using custom annotations.
* __Extensible:__ Gateway allows for custom resources to be linked at various layers of the API.
  This makes granular customization possible at the appropriate places within the API structure.

## Resource model

The Gateway API has three stable API kinds:

* __GatewayClass:__ Defines a set of gateways with common configuration and managed by a controller
  that implements the class.

* __Gateway:__ Defines an instance of traffic handling infrastructure, such as cloud load balancer.

> * Route kinds: The Gateway API specifies API kinds, HTTPRoute for example, that define protocol-specific

Reviewer 2: I like mentioning that there are other routes but I think we should either make `HTTPRoute` more prominent here, given that it alone has its own section later on. OR rename the later section "Route kinds" and mention how the other route kinds fit in. As is, it's weird that HTTPRoute is "just an example" of presumably a number of routes here but later on is the only one we discuss without mention of what the status/place of the other routes is.

Author: I have updated this section to use HTTPRoute instead of Route kinds based on your feedback. I think this makes sense since this section is only talking about the GA kinds. I include a link in the what's next to reference the additional kinds.

  rules for mapping traffic from a Gateway listener to a representation of backend network endpoints.
  These endpoints are often represented as a {{<glossary_tooltip text="Service" term_id="service">}}.

The Gateway API is organized into different API kinds that have interdependent relationships to support
the role-oriented nature of organizations. A Gateway object is associated with exactly one GatewayClass;
the GatewayClass describes the gateway controller responsible for managing Gateways of this class.
Route kinds such as HTTPRoute, are then associated to Gateways. A Gateway can filter the routes that
may be attached to its `listeners`, forming a bidirection trust model with routes.

The following figure illustrates the relationships of the three stable Gateway API kinds:

> {{< figure src="/docs/images/gateway-kind-relationships.svg" alt="A figure illustrating the relationships of the three stable Gateway API kinds" class="diagram-medium" >}}

Reviewer 2: I stumbled a little over the diagram, two of the box labels are _kinds_, and the other two are presumably names of `HTTPRoutes`. I suggest changing both labels to `HTTPRoute` or add names as sort of sub title.

Author: I have updated the diagram based on your feedback.

### GatewayClass {#api-kind-gateway-class}

Gateways can be implemented by different controllers, often with different configurations. A Gateway
must reference a GatewayClass that contains the name of the controller which implements the
class. The GatewayClass can also define optional configuration parameters.

A minimal GatewayClass example:

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: GatewayClass
metadata:
  name: example-class
spec:
  controllerName: example.com/gateway-controller
  parametersRef:
    name: example-params
    group: config.example.com
    kind: Parameters
```

> In this example, a controller that implements the Gateway API is configured to manage GatewayClasses
> with the controller name `example.com/gateway-controller`. An optional `parametersRef` is specified to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this example, a controller that implements the Gateway API is configured to manage Gateways
that reference GatewayClasses with the controller name `example.com/gateway-controller`. An optional `parametersRef` is specified to
```

Author: The following is technically accurate:
```
.. a controller that implements the Gateway API is configured to manage GatewayClasses
	with the controller name `example.com/gateway-controller`.
```

I have updated this section to reduce the possibility for confusion.

traffic routes into a cloud load balancer or in-cluster proxy server.

A minimal HTTPRoute example:

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: example-httproute
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: example-gateway
  hostnames:
  - "www.example.com"
  rules:
  - matches:
    - path:
        type: PathPrefix
        value: /login
    backendRefs:
    - name: example-svc
      port: 8080
```

In this example, HTTP traffic from Gateway `example-gateway` with the Host: header set to `www.example.com`
and the request path specified as `/login` will be routed to Service `example-svc` on port `8080`.

See the [HTTPRoute](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1.HTTPRoute)
reference for a full definition of this API kind.

## Request flow

Here is a simple example of HTTP traffic being routed to a Service by using a Gateway and an HTTPRoute:

{{< figure src="/docs/images/gateway-request-flow.svg" alt="A diagram that provides an example of HTTP traffic being routed to a Service by using a Gateway and an HTTPRoute" class="diagram-medium" >}}

> 
> _GatewayClass is ommitted in the figure for brevity purposes._

Reviewer 2: I think GatewayClass just doesn't really have a place in representing traffic flow

```suggestion
```

Author: @michaelbeaumont It's important to get the perspective of someone new to Gateway API, so I really appreciate your review. GatewayClass could have a place in representing traffic flow but not in this example. For instance, `gatewayclass.spec.parametersRef` may contain Gateway config parameters that would influence traffic flow, e.g. use a cloud load balancer to load balance traffic across multiple instances that represent a Gateway.

Reviewer 3: I agree that in this particular example, GatewayClass doesn't really have a place. I think this sentence can just be removed.

In this example, the request flow for a Gateway implemented as a reverse proxy is:

1. The client starts to prepare an HTTP request for the URL `http://www.example.com`
2. The client's DNS resolver queries for the destination name and learns a mapping to
   one or more IP addresses associated with the Gateway.
3. The client sends a request to the Gateway IP address; the reverse proxy receives the HTTP
   request and uses the Host: header to match a configuration that was derived from the Gateway
   and attached HTTPRoute.
4. Optionally, the reverse proxy can perform request header and/or path matching based
   on match rules of the HTTPRoute.
5. Optionally, the reverse proxy can modify the request; for example, to add or emove headers,
   based on filter rules of the HTTPRoute.
6. Lastly, the reverse proxy forwards the request to one or more backends.

## Conformance

Gateway API covers a broad set of features and is widely implemented. This combination requires
clear conformance definitions and tests to ensure that the API provides a consistent experience

> wherever it is used.

Reviewer 2: This sentence is worded a bit odd, can we mention that we in fact have these definitions and tests and perhaps link to something that goes into more detail about conformance/conformant implementations?

Author: This section was much more verbose but it has been paired back based on review feedback. I will read a link to the Gateway API conformance docs.

> ## {{% heading "whatsnext" %}}

Reviewer: This needs to be the last level 2 heading in the page.

Author: Commit 396bff0 resolved this comment.

---
title: Gateway API
content_type: concept
description: >-
  Gateway API is a family of API kinds that provide dynamic infrastructure provisioning
  and advanced traffic routing.
weight: 55
---

<!-- overview -->

Make network services available by using an extensible, role-oriented, protocol-aware configuration

> mechanism. The [Gateway API](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/) is an {{<glossary_tooltip text="add-on" term_id="addons">}}

Reviewer: I know SIG Network has picked an approach, but as we look to add the documentation properly, is that up for reconsideration?

Ideally we have had this discussion earlier (eg: before beta), but I'd still like to discuss it. You can tell that my personal view is that “The Gateway API” can be more idiomatic; it is what I will say when talking for example.

> mechanism. The [Gateway API](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/) is an {{<glossary_tooltip text="add-on" term_id="addons">}}

Reviewer 4: Although I'm happy to reopen that conversation, I don't think that conversation needs to block this PR. At this point in time, "Gateway API" is the correct way to refer to the project as @youngnick mentioned. I think it's critical to get this documentation included on kubernetes.io, and the discussion about the nuances on naming can follow. I've created https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/2553 to ensure that we have that discussion and document the result.

* __Extensible:__ Gateway allows for custom resources to be linked at various layers of the API.
  This makes granular customization possible at the appropriate places within the API structure.

## Resource model

The Gateway API has three stable API kinds:

* __GatewayClass:__ Defines a set of gateways with common configuration and managed by a controller
  that implements the class.

* __Gateway:__ Defines an instance of traffic handling infrastructure, such as cloud load balancer.

* __HTTPRoute:__ Defines HTTP-specific rules for mapping traffic from a Gateway listener to a
  representation of backend network endpoints. These endpoints are often represented as a
  {{<glossary_tooltip text="Service" term_id="service">}}.

The Gateway API is organized into different API kinds that have interdependent relationships to support
the role-oriented nature of organizations. A Gateway object is associated with exactly one GatewayClass;
the GatewayClass describes the gateway controller responsible for managing Gateways of this class.
One or more route kinds such as HTTPRoute, are then associated to Gateways. A Gateway can filter the routes

> that may be attached to its `listeners`, forming a bidirection trust model with routes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
that may be attached to its `listeners`, forming a bidirectional trust model with routes.
```

---
title: Gateway
content_type: concept
description: >-
  Make network services available by using an extensible, role-oriented, protocol-aware
  API. Gateway is a group of resources that provide dynamic infrastructure provisioning
  and advanced traffic routing for Kubernetes services.
weight: 55
---

<!-- overview -->

> {{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.29" state="stable" >}}

Author: The plan is to have Gateway API v1.0 (GA) cut on 11/1. The GatewayClass, Gateway, and HTTPRoute resources that are documented here will be considered stable.

https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/milestones

> {{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.29" state="stable" >}}

Reviewer 4: Yep, we will have Gateway API v1.0 released prior to Kubernetes 1.29, but they're actually independent versioning schemes. We probably want something that looks approximately like this but says something like `FEATURE STATE: Gateway API v1.0 [stable]`. Any suggestions for how we can represent this @sftim?

> {{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.29" state="stable" >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Omit the shortcode for now; a **follow-up** PR could define a way to represent out-of-tree feature states.

> {{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.29" state="stable" >}}

Author: @sftim I added a shortcode for managing Gateway API feature support levels. PTAL and let me know if you prefer if I omit this from the PR.

> {{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.29" state="stable" >}}

Author: I removed the shortcodes for the GA Gateway API kinds.

* __Role-oriented:__ Gateway API resources are modeled after organizational roles that are
  responsible for managing Kubernetes service networking:
  * __Infrastructure Provider:__ Manages infrastructure that allows multiple isolated clusters
    to serve multiple tenants, e.g. a cloud provider.
  * __Cluster Operator:__ Manages clusters and is typically concerned with policies, network
    access, application permissions, etc.
  * __Application Developer:__ Manages an application running in a cluster and is typically
    concerned with application-level configuration and [Service][service] composition.
* __Portable:__ Gateway API specifications are defined as [custom resources][crds] and are supported
  by many [implementations][implementations].
* __Expressive:__ Gateway API resources support functionality for common traffic routing use cases
  such as header-based matching, traffic weighting, and others that were only possible in [Ingress][ingress]
  by using custom annotations.
* __Extensible:__ Gateway API allows for custom resources to be linked at various layers of the API.
  This makes granular customization possible at the appropriate places within the API structure.

> Refer to the Gateway API [documentation][gw-api] for additional details of these concepts.

Author: I provided additional context in the overview section and updated Gateway API doc references accordingly.

## Resource Model

Three primary resources exist in Gateway API:

* __GatewayClass:__ Defines a set of gateways with common configuration and managed by a controller
  that implements the class.

* __Gateway:__ Defines an instance of traffic handling infrastructure, e.g. cloud load balancer.

* __Route:__  Route itself is not a resource but a general representation of different resources,
  e.g. HTTPRoute, that define protocol-specific rules for mapping requests from a Gateway to backends
  such as a Service.

See the Gateway API [documentation][gw-api] for additional details of all supported resources.

> ### Resoure Relationships

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### API kinds used for Gateway
```

     that support the feature will have the same behavior and semantics. It is expected that some number of
     roadmap features will eventually migrate into the _Core_. An _Extended_ feature is part of the API types
     schema.
   * __Implementation-specific__ feature is not portable across implementations and is vendor-specific.
     An _Implementation-specific_ feature will not have API types and schema, except via generic extension
     points. The implementation is responsible for providing conformance tests to validate these features.

1. __Conformance Tests:__ Gateway API includes a set of conformance tests to validate _Core_ and _Extended_
   features.

## Getting Started

Instead of Gateway API resources being natively implemented by Kubernetes, the specifications
are defined as [Custom Resources][crds] supported by a wide range of [implementations][implementations].
You can [install][install] the Gateway API CRDs manually, but this step is typically accomplished by
your selected implementation. Use one of the following tabs to install a Gateway API implementation:

{{< tabs name="service_tabs" >}}
{{% tab name="Default" %}}
Select one of the tabs.
{{% /tab %}}

> {{% tab name="Envoy Gateway" %}}

Reviewer: Only one implementation?

Author: We have a handful of conformant implementations. I wanted to see what @robscott thought about adding tabs for conformant implementations to this doc and I used Envoy Gateway as an example. I'm not sure if we want this level of detail but having a reference to conformant implementations may incentivize vendors.

xref: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/tree/main/conformance/reports

Reviewer 4: We've intentionally avoided considering any Gateway API implementation a reference one, and in this case I'm concerned that these docs would get stale quickly. Instead I'd recommend linking out to the [Gateway API getting started page](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/). Although that page could use some improvements, it's probably better to keep that kind of content on Gateway API docs where it will be easier for us to keep it up-to-date. For example, we already manually update that page as part of every release.

Reviewer 3: Yeah, I agree that it's probably better to call out to the Getting Started guide on the Gateway API site - this will be super hard to keep up to date.

Reviewer 5: There is currently already precedent in the Kubernetes docs of adding tabs for implementations
https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/#internal-load-balancer
would be great if Gateway API can follow this template

It might be best if the tabs link to the Implementations Getting Started page (as suggested by @kflynn )

Reviewer: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/#internal-load-balancer is there because of a bad design choice historically. Let's not use that as a precedent.

Reviewer 3: We have a lot of things to work out here to ensure that we're not picking winners; I don't think that right now is the best time for that, so I'm -1 on having tabs in here _for now_.

So, I recommend we keep this page minimal, and then come back to this after Kubecon. I don't think this one will languish, as we all have incentive to ensure that conformant implementations are properly promoted.

Author: Based on the majority of the feedback, I have simplified this section. @arkodg feel free to create a Gateway API issue if you would like to discuss this further.

---
title: Gateway
content_type: concept
description: >-
  Make network services available by using an extensible, role-oriented, protocol-aware
  API. Gateway is a group of resources that provide dynamic infrastructure provisioning
  and advanced traffic routing for Kubernetes services.
weight: 55
---

<!-- overview -->
{{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.29" state="stable" >}}

Make network services available by using an extensible, role-oriented, protocol-aware configuration

> mechanism. The [Gateway][gw-api] API consists of [resources][resources] that provide dynamic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mechanism. The [Gateway API][gw-api]  consists of API kinds that extend Kubernetes to provide dynamic
```
Even better: put the target URL in the same line.

infrastructure provisioning and advanced traffic routing.

> The Gateway project is maintained by the [SIG-NETWORK][sig-net] community outside of Kubernetes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The term _Gateway API_ refers to a family of extension APIs that you can deploy into your
Kubernetes cluster to gain the extra functionality.
```

Author: I removed this paragraph since Gateway API is defined in the glossary and again in the first paragraph of this page.

Since certain Gateway API resources are considered stable, a subset of the full Gateway [documentation][gw-api]

> is included here.

Reviewer: I wouldn't state this. We should start to list all the Gateway API kinds in this document, even if just as stubs and hyperlinks. That's what our readers would want, especially given that the core API kinds are GA.

Author: @robscott if we take ^ approach, then we need to use `{{< feature-state for_gwapi_version="v1.0" state="stable|beta|alpha" >}}` for each.

Reviewer: Hmm; that shortcode (or a revised version of it) doesn't feel like the right fit to me.

Author: @sftim I created a shortcode for Gateway API features. Please take a look and let me know if you still prefer omitting it from this PR.

<!-- body -->

## Concepts

The following concepts form the foundation of Gateway:

* __Role-oriented:__ Gateway API resources are modeled after organizational roles that are
  responsible for managing Kubernetes service networking:
  * __Infrastructure Provider:__ Manages infrastructure that allows multiple isolated clusters
    to serve multiple tenants, e.g. a cloud provider.
  * __Cluster Operator:__ Manages clusters and is typically concerned with policies, network
    access, application permissions, etc.
  * __Application Developer:__ Manages an application running in a cluster and is typically
    concerned with application-level configuration and [Service][service] composition.
* __Portable:__ Gateway API specifications are defined as [custom resources][crds] and are supported
  by many [implementations][implementations].
* __Expressive:__ Gateway API resources support functionality for common traffic routing use cases
  such as header-based matching, traffic weighting, and others that were only possible in [Ingress][ingress]
  by using custom annotations.
* __Extensible:__ Gateway allows for custom resources to be linked at various layers of the API.

>   This makes granular customization possible at the appropriate places within the API structure.

Reviewer: These are not concepts; they were the guiding principles to shape the design and architecture.

Refer to the full Gateway API [documentation][gw-api] for additional details of these concepts.

## Resource model

> Three primary resources exist in the Gateway API:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The stable Gateway API has three principal API kinds:
```

* __GatewayClass:__ Defines a set of gateways with common configuration and managed by a controller
  that implements the class.

> * __Gateway:__ Defines an instance of traffic handling infrastructure, e.g. cloud load balancer.

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
* __Gateway:__ Defines an instance of traffic handling infrastructure, such as a cloud load balancer.
```

> * __Route:__  Route itself is not a resource but a general representation of different resources,
>   e.g. HTTPRoute, that define protocol-specific rules for mapping requests from a Gateway to resources
>   such as a Service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Route kinds: THe Gateway API defines specific API kinds (for example: HTTPRoute) that define
  protocol-specific rules for mapping traffic from a Gateway to a representation of its backing
  endpoints. Often, the backing endpoints are represented as a
  {{<glossary_tooltip text="Service" term_id="service">}}.
```

See the full Gateway API [documentation][gw-api] for additional details of all supported resources.

> ### API kinds used for Gateway

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> The Gateway API is organized into resources that have interdependent relationships to support the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Gateway API is organized into different API kinds that have interdependent relationships to support the
```

> role-oriented nature of organizations. A Gateway resource is associated with a GatewayClass, which
> describes the gateway controller responsible for managing Gateways of this class. Route resources,
> e.g. HTTPRoute, are then associated to Gateway resources, which define protocol-specific rules for
> mapping requests from a Gateway to backend resources. A Gateway can filter the routes that may be
> attached to its `listeners`, forming a bidirection trust model with Routes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
role-oriented nature of organizations. A Gateway object is associated with exactly one GatewayClass;
the GatewayClass describes the gateway controller responsible for managing Gateways of this class.
Route kinds such as HTTPRoute, are then associated to Gateways. A Gateway can filter the routes that
may be attached to its `listeners`, forming a bidirection trust model with routes.
```

The following figure illustrates the relationships of the three primary Gateway API resources:

> {{< figure src="/docs/images/gateway-api-schema.svg" alt="gateway-api-schema" class="diagram-medium" link="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/main/site-src/images/schema-uml.svg" >}}

Reviewer: - You must commit the images here and serve them via our CDN. Don't rely on the `main` branch of the Gateway API having the right content.
- Please set a useful `alt` attribute.

> ### GatewayClass resource

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### GatewayClass {#api-kind-gateway-class}
```

Gateways can be implemented by different controllers, often with different configurations. A Gateway

> must reference a GatewayClass resource which contains the name of the controller that implements the
> class and optional configuration parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
must reference a GatewayClass that contains the name of the controller which implements the
class. The GatewayClass can also define optional configuration parameters.
```

> A minimal GatewayClass resource example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A minimal GatewayClass example:
```

{{% code_sample file="service/networking/gateway-class.yaml" %}}

In this example, a controller that implements the Gateway API is configured to manage GatewayClasses
with the controller name `example.com/gateway-controller`. An optional `parametersRef` is specified to

> reference an implementation-specific `Parameters` custom resource containing additional configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
reference an implementation-specific Parameters custom resource containing additional configuration
```

parameters. Gateways of this class will be configured with these parameters.

See the [GatewayClass][gatewayclass] reference for a full definition of this resource.

> ### Gateway resource

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Gateway {#api-kind-gateway}
```

A Gateway describes an instance of traffic handling infrastructure. It defines a network endpoint
that can be used for processing traffic, i.e. filtering, balancing, splitting, etc. for backends
such as a Service resource. For example, HTTP traffic sent to a Kubernetes Service by a cloud load
balancer or an in-cluster proxy server.

A minimal Gateway resource example:

{{% code_sample file="service/networking/gateway.yaml" %}}

In this example, an instance of traffic handling infrastructure is programmed to listen for HTTP
traffic on port 80. Since the `addresses` field is unspecified, an address or hostname is assigned
to the Gateway by the controller that is used as a network endpoint for processing traffic.

> See the [Gateway][gateway] reference for a full definition of this resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the [Gateway][gateway] reference for a full definition of this API kind.
```

> ### Route resources

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### The route API kinds {#api-kind-route-family}
```

> Route resources, e.g. HTTPRoute, describe protocol-specific rules for mapping requests from a
> Gateway resource to backend resources such as a Service. When a Route attaches to a Gateway, it
> represents configuration that is applied to the underlying Gateway implementation, e.g. load balancer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Within the Gateway API there are API kinds that represent routes. For example, HTTPRoute describes
protocol-specific rules for mapping requests from a Gateway  to backing endpoints.
When a route object attaches to a Gateway, the route represents configuration that is applied to the
underlying Gateway implementation; for example, defining a new HTTPRoute might configure
additional traffic routes into a cloud load balancer.
```

> A minimal HTTPRoute resource example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A minimal HTTPRoute example:
```

{{% code_sample file="service/networking/httproute.yaml" %}}

> In this example, HTTP traffic from Gateway `example-gateway` with host header "www.example.com/login"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, HTTP traffic from Gateway `example-gateway` with the Host: header set to `www.example.com`
and the request path specified as `/login`
```

will be routed to Service `example-svc` on port `8080`.

> See the [HTTPRoute][httproute] reference for a full definition of this resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the [HTTPRoute][httproute] reference for a full definition of this API kind.
```

## Request flow

> Here is a simple example of HTTP client traffic being routed to a `Service` by using the
> Gateway and HTTPRoute resources:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is a simple example of HTTP traffic being routed to a Service by using one
Gateway and some HTTPRoutes:
```

> {{< figure src="/docs/images/gateway-api.svg" alt="gateway-api-diagram" class="diagram-medium" link="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/main/site-src/images/httproute-basic-example.svg" >}}

Reviewer: - You must commit the images here and serve them via our CDN. Don't rely on the `main` branch of the Gateway API having the right content.
- Please set a useful `alt` attribute.

> {{< note >}}
> GatewayClass is ommitted in the figure for brevity purposes.
> {{< /note >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_GatewayClass is ommitted in the figure for brevity purposes._
```
Consider setting a caption for the image.

In the above example, the request flow for a Gateway implemented as a reverse proxy is:

> 1. The client creates an HTTP request to a destination, i.e. "http://www.example.com".
> 2. DNS resolves the destination name to a Gateway address.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The client starts to prepare an HTTP request for the URL `http://www.example.com`
2. The client's DNS resolver queries for the destination name and learns a mapping to one or more IP addresses associated with the Gateway.
```

> 3. The reverse proxy receives the HTTP request on a listener and uses the Host header
>    to match an HTTPRoute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. The client makes a request to the reverse proxy; the reverse proxy receives the HTTP request and uses
   the Host: header to match a configuration. That configuration is derived from the associated HTTPRoute.
```

4. Optionally, the reverse proxy can perform request header and/or path matching based
   on match rules of the HTTPRoute.

> 5. Optionally, the reverse proxy can modify the request, i.e. add/remove headers, based
>    on filter rules of the HTTPRoute.
> 6. Lastly, the reverse proxy forwards the request to one or more objects, i.e. Service,
>    based on rules of the HTTPRoute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Optionally, the reverse proxy can modify the request; for example, to add or emove headers, based
   on filter rules of the HTTPRoute.
6. Lastly, the reverse proxy forwards the request to one or more backends. The Gateway implementation
   discovers those backends from their association with a Service, and from the forwarding rules associated
   with the HTTPRoute.
```

   on this concept, refer to the [versioning][versioning] documentation.
2. __Support Levels:__ Some implementations of the API may not support every feature. To address this,
   the API defines _Core_, _Extended_, and _Implementation-specific_ support levels for each feature:

   * __Core__ feature is portable across ALL implementations and is validated by conformance tests. A Core
     feature is part of the API types schema.
   * __Extended__ feature is portable but not universally supported across implementations. Implementations
     that support the feature will have the same behavior and semantics. It is expected that some number of
     roadmap features will eventually migrate into the _Core_. An _Extended_ feature is part of the API types
     schema.
   * __Implementation-specific__ feature is not portable across implementations and is vendor-specific.
     An _Implementation-specific_ feature will not have API types and schema, except via generic extension
     points. The implementation is responsible for providing conformance tests to validate these features.

1. __Conformance Tests:__ Gateway API includes a set of conformance tests to validate _Core_ and _Extended_

>    features.

Reviewer: Could this be a link to another page?

> ## Getting started

Reviewer: I would omit this whole section from the concept page. You can change the What's Next page section to link to the Gateway API page on getting started.

Instead of Gateway API resources being natively implemented by Kubernetes, the specifications
are defined as [Custom Resources][crds] supported by a wide range of [implementations][implementations].

> You can [install][install] the Gateway API CRDs manually, but this step is typically accomplished by
> your selected implementation. Use one of the following tabs to install a Gateway API implementation:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can [install][install] the Gateway API CRDs manually, but a better way is to follow
the installation instructions for your selected implementation.

Use one of the following tabs to install a Gateway API implementation:
```

I've actually become -1 on automatically installing the CRDs, because there are a bunch of weird edge cases that can happen if multiple implementations are present in the cluster and want different versions. (Writing out better rules here is a TODO for me at the moment though). In any case, I recommend using this version here, wherever it ends up living, so that we're not making an implication about what's better.

I agree with the comments below that we should just link to the Gateway API Getting Started page here, and then update that page to make the steps clearer.

Author: @youngnick I agree with your -1 after the upstream implementation docs are updated accordingly. In the meantime, I am concerned that an implementation may not properly handle this use case. I have updated this section based on the upstream docs, PTAL.

Install the Gateway API CRDs and Envoy Gateway:

```sh
helm install eg oci://docker.io/envoyproxy/gateway-helm --version v0.5.0 -n envoy-gateway-system --create-namespace
```

Wait for Envoy Gateway to become available:

```sh
kubectl wait --timeout=5m -n envoy-gateway-system deployment/envoy-gateway --for=condition=Available
```

Install the GatewayClass, Gateway, HTTPRoute, and example application resources:

```sh
kubectl apply -f https://github.com/envoyproxy/gateway/releases/download/v0.5.0/quickstart.yaml -n default
```

Follow [these steps][eg-testing] to test the installation or refer to the official Envoy Gateway
[documentation][eg-docs] for additional instructions.

[eg-docs]: https://gateway.envoyproxy.io/
[eg-testing]: https://gateway.envoyproxy.io/v0.5.0/user/quickstart/#testing-the-configuration
[helm]: https://helm.sh/docs/intro/install/
[kubectl]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/#kubectl

{{% /tab %}}

{{< /tabs >}}

{{< note >}}
Make sure to review the documentation of your selected implementation to understand any caveats.
{{< /note >}}

Refer to the Gateway API [guides][guides] to learn more about getting started.

## Migrating from Ingress

> 

Reviewer 6: small suggestion: if adding in `What's Next` section, maybe move this under that
